1. Pain. 2011 Mar;152(3):632-42. Epub 2011 Jan 22.

A randomised, five-parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial comparing the
efficacy and tolerability of analgesic combinations including a novel
single-tablet combination of ibuprofen/paracetamol for postoperative dental pain.

Daniels SE, Goulder MA, Aspley S, Reader S.

Premier Research, Austin, TX 78705, USA. stephen.daniels@premier-research.com

Combination analgesia is often recommended for the relief of severe pain. This
was a double-blind, 5-arm, parallel-group, placebo-controlled, randomised,
single-dose study designed to compare the efficacy and tolerability of a novel
single-tablet combination of ibuprofen and paracetamol with that of an
ibuprofen/codeine combination, and a paracetamol/codeine combination, using the
dental impaction pain model. Subjects with at least 3 impacted third molars and
experiencing moderate to severe postoperative pain were randomised to receive: 1 
or 2 tablets of a single-tablet combination of ibuprofen 200mg/paracetamol 500mg;
2 tablets of ibuprofen 200 mg/codeine 12.8mg; 2 tablets of paracetamol
500mg/codeine 15mg; or placebo. Results for the primary endpoint, the sum of the 
mean scores of pain relief combined with pain intensity differences over 12hours,
demonstrated that 1 and 2 tablets of the single-tablet combination of
ibuprofen/paracetamol were statistically significantly more efficacious than 2
tablets of placebo (P<0.0001) and paracetamol/codeine (P⩽0.0001); furthermore, 2 
tablets offered significantly superior pain relief to ibuprofen/codeine
(P=0.0001), and 1 tablet was found noninferior to this combination. Adverse
events were uncommon during this study and treatment emergent adverse events were
statistically significantly less frequent in the groups taking the
ibuprofen/paracetamol combination compared with codeine combinations. In
conclusion, 1 or 2 tablets of a single-tablet combination of ibuprofen
200mg/paracetamol 500mg provided highly effective analgesia that was comparable
with, or superior to, other combination analgesics currently indicated for strong
pain. A single-tablet combination of ibuprofen 200mg/paracetamol 500mg provides
highly effective analgesia, comparable or superior to other combination
analgesics indicated for strong pain.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21257263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

