6. BJU Int. 2011 Sep;108(6):984-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2011.10565.x.         
                                                                                   
Anatomical grades of nerve sparing: a risk-stratified approach to neural-hammock   
sparing during robot-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP).                        
                                                                                   
Tewari AK, Srivastava A, Huang MW, Robinson BD, Shevchuk MM, Durand M,             
Sooriakumaran P, Grover S, Yadav R, Mishra N, Mohan S, Brooks DC, Shaikh N,        
Khanna A, Leung R.                                                                 
                                                                                   
LeFrak Institute of Robotic Surgery and Prostate Cancer Institute, James Buchanan  
Brady Foundation Department of Urology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory     
Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.          
                                                                                   
What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? During radical           
prostatectomy, urological surgeons have tried to identify the "cord-like NVB" at   
the lateral aspect of the prostate. However, little histological or physiological  
investigation was conducted to verify that the NVB identified at surgery really    
included the cavernous nerve. Recently, there have been observations that refute   
the dogma that the cavernous nerve is always within the NVB. In this study, we     
have described a hammock-like distribution of the nerves on which the prostate     
rests, demonstrating that the NVB is more a network of multiple fine dispersed     
nerves than a distinct structure. We presented a novel nerve-sparing approach to   
complete hammock preservation. This risk-stratified approach for determining the   
degree of nerve sparing based on the patient's likelihood of ipsilateral EPE       
seeks to categorize patients for optimal balance between oncological outcomes and  
functional outcomes.OBJECTIVES: •  To report the potency and oncological outcomes  
of patients undergoing robot-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP) using a         
risk-stratified approach based on layers of periprostatic fascial dissection. •    
We also describe the surgical technique of complete hammock preservation or nerve  
sparing grade 1.                                                                   
PATIENTS AND METHODS: •  This is a retrospective study of 2317 patients who had    
robotic prostatectomy by a single surgeon at a single institution between January  
2005 and June 2010. •  Included patients were those with =1 year of follow-up and  
who were potent preoperatively, defined as having a sexual health inventory for    
men (SHIM) questionnaire score of >21; thus, the final number of patients in the   
study cohort was 1263. •  Patients were categorized pre-operatively by a           
risk-stratified approach into risk grades 1-4, where risk grade 1 patients         
received nerve-sparing grade 1 or complete hammock preservation and so on for      
risk grades 2-4, as long as intraoperative findings permitted the planned nerve    
sparing. •  We considered return to sexual function post-operatively by two        
criteria: i) ability to have successful intercourse (score of =4 on question 2 of  
the SHIM) and ii) SHIM >21 or return to baseline sexual function.                  
RESULTS: •  There was a significant difference across different NS grades in       
terms of the percentages of patients who had intercourse and returned to baseline  
sexual function (P < 0.001), with those that underwent NS grade 1 having the       
highest rates (90.9% and 81.7%) as compared to NS grades 2 (81.4% and74.3%), 3     
(73.5% and 66.1%), and 4 (62% and 54.5%). •  The overall positive surgical margin  
(PSM) rates for patients with NS grades 1, 2, 3, and 4 were 9.9%, 8.1%, 7.2%, and  
8.7%, respectively (P = 0.636). •  The extraprostatic extension rates were 11.6%,  
14.3%, 29.3%, and 36.2%, respectively (P < 0.001). •  Similarly, in patients       
younger than 60, intercourse and return to baseline sexual function rates were     
94.9% and 84.3% for NS grade 1 as compared to 85.5% and 77.2% for NS grades 2,     
76.9% and 69% for NS grades 3, and 64.8% and 57.7% for NS Grade 4 (P < 0.001).     
CONCLUSIONS: •  The risk-stratified approach and anatomical technique of           
neural-hammock sparing described in the present manuscript was effective in        
improving potency outcomes of patients without compromising cancer control. •      
Patients with greater degrees of NS had higher rates of intercourse and return to  
baseline sexual function without an increase in PSM rates.                         
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
PMID: 21917101  [PubMed - in process]                                              
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
